[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Sometimes
we need someone to tell us
we're just fine, warts and all.
Scott Stabile, in
his book "Big Love,"
features his
self-proclaimed many flaws
to prove that life is good and
is filled with grace and love,
in spite of our own
worst efforts at times.
It's good to meet you, Scott.
>>SCOTT STABILE: Thank you.
It's good to meet you too.
>>REGINA: It was a
fun book, you know?
We're going to talk about
the part that's not fun,
to start this
conversation off, to show
the depth of your own experience
in life and what shaped you.
>>STABILE: Sure.
>>REGINA: But the book itself
is so raw in your assessment
of yourself.
There's really no
self-flattery in it that I see.
And so it's like, oh,
God, I'm like that.
People read it and feel,
oh, I've done that.
I'm like that too.
And it's like, you have
company, so to speak--
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --to be who you
are, whatever that is.
>>STABILE: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: So with you, I
want to start with your life
and earlier on in your life.
Let's start when you
were a little kid first,
but before we go on
to the events that
happened at age 14,
in that you tended
to put a big smile on
all of it, no matter
what was going on underneath.
And we all have done it.
And we all know people who
literally that's their defense
mechanism for living is
just paste a smile on it
and laugh a lot, and
then the suffering
is happening and
causing deeper troubles.
>>STABILE: Sure.
>>REGINA: So let's
go about you when
you were a kid first and
the nature of your family
and your home life.
>>STABILE: Yeah, I
mean, I think also
with what you're saying is I
feel really grateful that I was
born with a personality that
steered its way to optimism
a bit more naturally.
I have a lot of friends who
have to work a lot harder
to get to a neutral
place, and some of us
have an easier time being
a little more positive
and a little more optimistic.
>>REGINA: That is very
true, and that's almost
hard-wired in when you're born.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: You see it in babies.
>>STABILE: I believe it is.
It's personality.
>>REGINA: It is.
>>STABILE: I'm so grateful
that I was wired kind of
toward positivity and optimism.
I didn't have to
work quite as hard.
And then after going through
some traumatic events, which
I'm sure we'll discuss--
>>REGINA: Oh, we're going
to discuss all of it.
>>STABILE: Yeah, I mean, I
started to notice in my life
the ways in which that smile
that was always on my face
wasn't always authentic.
It was hiding a mountain of
pain and a mountain of things
that I didn't really want
to look at because pain
is hard to look at.
>>REGINA: Right, even
if you are an optimist.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
And we all have pain.
I mean, no matter how spirited
you are in your personality,
life is going to throw some
things at you that are tough.
>>REGINA: It's going to
do that with everyone.
And it's a matter of
whether you can address
it head-on in the moment, which
a lot of times is not possible.
A lot of times people,
for their own reasons
of defending and protecting
something in themselves,
choose not to
experience it fully
as it's rolling
out in the moment.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And I would
say maybe most people.
>>STABILE: Yeah--
>>REGINA: Maybe
even most people.
>>STABILE: --and that's OK.
That's the thing is--
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>STABILE: --that's OK.
Certainly--
>>REGINA: So you have
to go excavate later.
>>STABILE: Absolutely,
when you have
a little distance, a little
more perspective maybe.
Because so often when we're
hit by trauma, by shock,
by overwhelming situations,
you can't process
it or you can only
process it to some degree.
And you have to
be with it however
you're able to be
with it, which I
think is such an important
thing to convey to people.
It's not about right and
wrong ways of doing things.
It's about, for me,
making space for however
I'm showing up in my
life and understanding
that, as human beings, it's OK.
You're human.
>>REGINA: It's OK.
And you're right, there's
not a right or wrong way
because there's an
upside and a downside
to doing it either way.
They both have their challenges.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
And I'm in a place
in my life now where
I'm much more inclined
to face the things I'm
going through head-on
much sooner because I've
seen in my life how
when we avoid and escape
and we don't look at our
pain, when we don't take
responsibility for how we're
showing up in our lives,
it just builds and
builds within us.
And it creates problems we're
aware of, it creates problems
we're not aware of, when,
for me, part of growth,
part of healing,
part of evolution
is understanding I
can look at this now.
I can hold space for the pain.
I can sit with what I'm feeling.
It's not going to take me down.
And I think that we
tend to have fear
if we're really with
our pain that we're not
going to survive it.
>>REGINA: That you're
not going to survive it.
>>STABILE: And so we're
escaping and numbing
and all of that stuff that
doesn't ultimately serve much.
>>REGINA: Well, and I've only
recently realized in my own
life, because I tend
to live in the moment--
I'm very, very ordered
toward that to a fault--
but that includes pain.
So when things are happening,
like a five-year-old,
something happens
that's hurtful,
I am devastated and in absolute
despair right then and there.
I cannot see a way forward.
I cannot see a day
will ever be brighter.
It's just like a five-year-old.
>>STABILE: You're a feeler.
You'll feel it all.
>>REGINA: My poor husband
has to deal with it.
So I'm devastated.
But then like a five-year-old,
I've gone through it.
And when it's done, it's done.
>>STABILE: Yeah, you're
not holding it for months
and years--
>>REGINA: There
isn't anything to--
no, nothing's lingering.
>>STABILE: --and
keeping grudges.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
But the pain, feeling
like you're not going to--
I brought it up because
you just mentioned this--
the pain of feeling
like you're not
going to survive in the
moment is very intense.
So that's the
downside to processing
in the moment,
because you're right,
that's exactly how it feels.
>>STABILE: Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: But you
do get through it.
So I want to start with
your life as a young kid
and the nature of your family.
>>STABILE: The nature
of my family was,
in some ways, profoundly
dysfunctional.
There was a lot of addiction.
So I was the youngest
of seven kids.
Six of us are living.
One brother died from
a heroin overdose.
>>REGINA: We'll
talk about him too.
>>STABILE: Yeah, so
growing up, my father
was a gambling addict, and my
brother was a heroin addict.
And the energy of addiction
was very prominent
in our household.
I mean, when I reflect back on
it, it's like, that was just--
>>REGINA: That's what you knew.
>>STABILE: --what
was going on, yeah.
So I'd visit friends' homes, and
I definitely had a sense that--
even though I think everybody
has their own dysfunction,
of course, in their
homes, I definitely
had a sense that my
friends' families seem
to be a little more stable--
>>REGINA: Together.
>>STABILE: --seeming.
Together.
And maybe they were,
maybe they weren't.
But yeah, so we grew up with a
lot of instability around that.
I was the youngest kid,
though, so I was aware
as I could possibly be
because I was a curious kid.
But also, everything
was being kept from me.
So I discovered things
by discovering them,
and you can't really
keep addiction
from the people who are in
the house experiencing it.
When my brother is
coming around and where
everyone's hiding their
money and locking the--
>>REGINA: Valuables.
>>STABILE: --doors,
you know what I mean?
And that was just a
real part of life.
So I grew up in that, but
also grew up with friends
and grew up playing
outside all the time.
It didn't feel traumatic.
I think in retrospect,
the most traumatic aspect
of my upbringing before
14 was just not feeling
loved by my dad, not having
a relationship with him,
not really--
>>REGINA: Not
understanding he probably
wasn't capable of that kind
of love that you wanted.
>>STABILE: Yeah, and, I mean,
my mom had me when she was 42.
In 1971, that was
old to have a kid.
And I wasn't planned,
and my parents
had done their parenting.
>>REGINA: Yeah, they were done.
>>STABILE: So the last few
of us who came around--
>>REGINA: You're the
runt of the litter.
>>STABILE: Yeah, exactly.
They were kind of just done.
And so, yeah, there
was some of that.
And I think in some ways
in my life now today
and the past five or
so years of my life,
I've really come to see the
ways in which not having
that father-son relationship
that you might hope for has
really impacted my life.
It's like, I could
see a commercial
with a father and a
son who love each other
and burst into tears.
And it's like, wow, that pain--
>>REGINA: That's still in you.
>>STABILE: --that
wound is still in me.
But I think at the time, it
just manifested as anger.
I hated my dad.
I thought he was a jerk.
I was going to swear,
but I held back.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, I got you.
>>STABILE: So, yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, so
let's move to 14,
and set the stage
for us, the location,
everything that was
happening at that time that
resulted in this event.
>>STABILE: Yeah, well,
I had spent the weekend
with my sister Rose and her
husband Joe and my nephew Joey.
And my parents had a
fruit market convenience
store in downtown
Detroit in an area that
wasn't so great
as far as safety,
and I used to work there a lot.
This might give you some insight
into my parent's parenting
skills, but at maybe nine
years old, 10 years old,
I would be working behind this
thick bulletproof glass running
the lotto and lottery machine.
And I thought I
was like the king
because there'd be lines of
people giving me their numbers
and I'd be punching it in.
>>REGINA: That's a power
position in the neighborhood.
>>STABILE: Exactly.
And they're just looking at
this little kid handing out
lottery tickets.
So I spent a lot of
time at that store,
but also was aware
that my uncle was
shot at that store and
paralyzed years before,
and things happened
around there.
And this one morning when
I was 14, my parents,
they were murdered.
They had come into the
store, and their one employee
had been stabbed by this man.
I guess they were
in a fight over--
no one really knows
the full story.
I mean, there are
assumptions about the story.
But my father called 911,
and the man was still there
and ended up shooting
both of my parents
and killing them as well.
>>REGINA: I mean, that's
something most of us
can't begin to fathom.
It's just kind of
shocking hearing about it.
But there were other
circumstances surrounding it
that perhaps made it
even more challenging
in that your mother-- you
had been begging your mom
to stop going to the store
>>STABILE: Yeah.
It was her last
week at the store.
It was her last days at the--
>>REGINA: She had
finally agreed to retire.
>>STABILE: --store.
She finally realized
it because it
made me really nervous
that she was still--
and it was unnecessary for
her to be down there working.
>>REGINA: And she was four
days away from her retirement
to work in the store.
>>STABILE: Yeah, so
the timing was insane.
>>REGINA: The timing was insane.
>>STABILE: Yeah, the
timing was insane.
>>REGINA: Because here you had
your hopes up for her safety,
and then the
unimaginable happens.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And how did
you find out about this?
How did this work
through your family?
>>STABILE: So I was spending
that weekend with my eldest
sister Rose, and she got a
call from my brother Jimmy
that our parents' car was
parked outside the store.
But the gates weren't
open, and it was well
past the time the store
should have been open.
And my sister and I both had
a horrible feeling inside.
It just didn't make any sense,
and had a really bad feeling.
And we drove to my
brother-in-law's-- my sister
Rose's husband Joe had a
deli called the Ham Palace,
and we drove there.
And my sister Kim
also worked there,
so we were just kind
of waiting there.
He closed the restaurant,
and we were waiting there
for my brother to go downtown
and find out what had happened.
So when my brother
came to the store,
that's when we found out.
>>REGINA: Had your
parents already
been taken away at that point?
And do you know what happened?
Don't even know.
It's like shock.
>>STABILE: I honestly
don't remember.
I'm not sure.
I know he had to go
identify their bodies.
>>REGINA: Your brother did.
>>STABILE: My brother did.
So I don't know where they
were when he did that.
>>REGINA: So seven kids now.
Now, some of them are grown.
You're not, but some
of them are grown.
>>STABILE: Most of them.
>>REGINA: Thank God.
>>STABILE: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: So they're--
>>STABILE: But in their
20s and early 30s.
>>REGINA: Right.
Yeah, exactly.
So how did this initially
hit the whole family
in terms of everybody reacts
to things differently,
and then you specifically?
>>STABILE: It was shock.
That time is such a blur.
Honestly, a lot
of my childhood I
don't really remember either,
I think, before that time.
It was just a shock
and horror to us all.
And I think interestingly, the
way in which my siblings and I,
we all dealt with it in a
very similar way, which was we
all shut it in and didn't
talk about it with each other,
didn't process it
with each other.
And it wasn't like we
agreed to do it that way,
but we all kind of
just did it that way.
So I was dealing with this
internally really on my own.
I wouldn't talk about
it with anybody.
Outside the time
when it happened,
when there were lots of tears,
I would cry once a year.
It was almost like clockwork
and just have a meltdown cry
precipitated by who knows
what, maybe a conversation
with people, maybe
drinking too much
in college, whatever it was.
And then lock it away.
For me personally,
it felt like it
was too overwhelming for people
to receive the information,
and it was too overwhelming
for me to be with people
when they were hearing about it.
So I created a big secret
around it, which was--
it took a lot of energy.
Because I moved in
with my sister, so
I had to transfer schools.
And this was in ninth grade.
It was at a time when
I was also coming
to terms with my sexuality,
not being straight.
And so I was carrying
a lot of secrets.
And I moved to this
new school, and I
became a master manipulator.
If conversations
with people were ever
going to steer their
way toward family talk,
I would manipulate them
away so people didn't ask me
about my family
and I didn't have
to reveal that I
didn't have parents
or that they were murdered
because that wasn't something
that the kids I was
around could relate to.
And I didn't want to be pitied.
It was just--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STABILE: --all
of it was awful.
>>REGINA: It would mark you.
>>STABILE: And I
felt like a freak.
>>REGINA: Yeah, sure.
>>STABILE: I felt like a
freak for being gay and not
really understanding
what I was experiencing,
and felt like a real
freak for being an orphan.
>>REGINA: For being
an orphan, yeah.
>>STABILE: And
the last thing you
want to be in high school
in ninth grade is a freak.
And I'm a new kid at a
new school, so it was--
>>REGINA: So did you
have to hide all of it?
Did you have to hide
being gay and all of it?
>>STABILE: Oh, yeah,
gay, never-- yeah, that
was for sure.
The parents stuff
eventually came out
because I would have
friends, and they
would become close friends.
And they'd come
over, and they would
see I was living with my sister,
and they'd ask questions.
And it was, for
me, Regina, always
such a profound
relief when people
knew because it was
one less person I
had to keep that secret around.
And then at one
point in high school,
I think around my junior
year, unbeknownst to me,
my uncle nominated
me-- once a week,
the "Detroit Free Press,"
which was the main paper,
would profile a
student of the week,
and my uncle
nominated me for it.
And I got selected to be
the student of the week.
And I thought it was because I
was an all A student and class
president and that kind of kid.
What I didn't understand
was when the guy came
to interview me,
the journalist, he
kept asking about my parents.
And I was like, I don't want
to talk about my parents.
And what I came to
understand after,
the only reason I had been
selected as student of the week
was not because I was
a straight A student.
There were a lot of straight
A student class presidents
in the Detroit area.
It's because my
parents were murdered
and I managed to
maintain that composure
and be a great student
and function basically.
I was specifically selected
because of that experience.
>>REGINA: And so everyone knew.
>>STABILE: So then it was
posted outside the office.
And at first, it
was, for me, seeing
that there when I walked
into school, I was like, no.
And then what I
realized after a day,
it was one of the biggest
gifts for me in high school
because a lot of kids
did come up to me.
But what I understood then
is like, everyone knows now.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you don't
have to hide anymore.
>>STABILE: It's not a secret.
I don't have to hide it.
It's one less thing to--
our secrets kill
us, and so it was
one less thing to worry about.
>>REGINA: Well, and then your
brother a few years later,
right?
>>STABILE: Yeah, about
nine years later.
Yeah, he died.
>>REGINA: He finally
died of his overdose.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you'd been really
angry at him at the time.
You said he was a loving
big-hearted guy with just
a loving word for everyone,
but too sensitive to live
in this world is your opinion.
>>STABILE: That was
my sense of it, yeah.
>>REGINA: That's your
observation of him.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so he
resorted to whatever
could take the pain away,
which put you all at risk.
>>STABILE: Yeah, I
mean, my brother Ricky
was 18 years my senior.
And as far as our family
kind of can put together,
that's when he started using.
So I only knew him--
>>REGINA: As an addict.
>>STABILE: --through
the lens of addiction.
And he was loving and
beautiful and wonderful,
and he created so much
heartbreak in our family
that it was hard for me
to separate his actions.
It was hard for me
in any way to accept
that he wasn't consciously
choosing this all the time.
And so as a kid, what
I'm seeing is he's
consciously choosing to hurt
our family by these choices
to use heroin.
So there was a lot of anger.
There was a lot of resentment.
There was a lot of hatred
even though I loved him.
And there was, in our
family, expectation.
We all knew someday
we were going
to receive a call about
our brother that he died.
And when my sister called,
she left a message.
And I could-- her voice,
"call me right away,"
the very first
thing is Ricky died.
He OD'd.
And there was, for me, a sense
of peace around it, not even
for myself because I didn't
have a lot of contact with him,
but I thought, wow, he's not
going to be in prisons anymore.
He's not going to be
in smack dens anymore.
Whatever his life was--
>>REGINA: He's free.
>>STABILE: He's free.
>>REGINA: Yeah, understandably.
So even though there's
some peace around it,
it's really kind of topping
off the tragedy of the family
dynamic.
And now you get to a
point where you ended up
in kind of a New Age shop,
working in a New Age shop.
Was it in LA?
>>STABILE: No, Bay Area
>>REGINA: Bay Area.
>>STABILE: San Francisco,
Haight-Ashbury district.
>>REGINA: Haight-Ashbury.
Right, that's right.
>>STABILE: Yeah, Upper Haight.
>>REGINA: Right.
So you end up working
in this New Age shop.
Now obviously, you
already have this--
first of all, do
you think you became
more of a high
achiever and performer
because of what had happened?
Or would you have
been that way anyway?
>>STABILE: Oh my God,
I was such a stress--
at eight, I was stressed
out about school--
>>REGINA: Tests.
>>STABILE: --and
always getting As.
No, I was always that way.
Absolutely.
The fact that I stayed that
way after losing my parents,
for me, feels like in
part luck because I
don't feel like I made
conscious choices at 14.
But something in me knew
to lock it away for now
and just stay on this path,
move in that direction.
And at some point in your life,
you're going to deal with it.
But as a 14-year-old, I
didn't know that consciously.
I feel so grateful that
that's the way I was guided.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So you were guided that way.
You continued on.
You excelled in
academics and so forth.
And now you're in
a New Age shop,
which was a life-changing--
>>STABILE: Isn't
everyone in the Bay Area
at some point in a New Age shop?
>>REGINA: Oh gosh, I mean,
I lived in Sedona 20 years.
Let's not even go there.
>>STABILE: Oh yeah,
you know New Age.
>>REGINA: Oh boy, yes, I do.
So now you're in a New
Age shop, and turned out,
it sounds like a
turning point for you.
>>STABILE: It was.
I feel called to say one
more thing about my brother
and about addiction because
my attitudes around addiction
have shifted a lot in my life.
And when I was angry
with my brother,
it was because I felt like
he didn't have a choice--
or because he was
making the choice.
And then I came to view
addiction as a disease
and that he didn't
have a choice.
And then I came to view--
I believe that
addiction is a disease,
but I also believe it's more.
I believe the way it
affects people and impacts
us is very different,
and that my brother died,
and when he did, I felt like
it was the only option for him
because he was never
going to overcome it.
And it's not how I see
addiction at all anymore.
I believe that if you're
living and breathing,
no matter how dire
your situation may be,
no matter how addicted you are
to whatever substance or sex
or whatever it is, that it is
absolutely possible to overcome
it.
Because people who are
recovering from addiction
are choosing every day, every
hour, every minute, right?
And it doesn't mean that
it's an easy choice.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>STABILE: But I
don't believe we are
powerless in the face of it.
So I just want to say that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I think that's powerful.
And also, you said
in your book we're
all addicts of some
kind or another.
>>STABILE: I believe that.
>>REGINA: Everybody's got
an addiction to something.
>>STABILE: The phone has
shown me that without question
that we're all
wired for addiction.
And the places it takes us, it
varies within us depending on--
>>REGINA: No matter what it
is, whether it's gambling,
whether it's drugs, whether
it's food, whether it's sex.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And
sensitives tend to be
the ones who become more
addicted to drugs and food,
for example.
I mean, this is a
big deal among women.
Women who are super
sensitive and empathic,
it's very common to
have food addictions
to try to get that
serotonin going
and just kind of crush it all.
>>STABILE: Absolutely, and
the way we numb with things.
And I think that it's,
for me, really important--
for me, what it
does is it allows
me to be more compassionate,
more empathetic.
Because I think that
people in addiction
get dismissed so easily
and stereotyped so easily
and stigmatized so
easily, and we really,
as a community and world,
need to move beyond that.
And I think we're
having conversations
that are more empathetic
and more compassionate,
and I think that's critical.
>>REGINA: I do.
I agree with you.
>>STABILE: So to
the New Age store.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so back
to the New Age store.
>>STABILE: That was a profound
change for me in my life
because there was this
gorgeous book section with all
of these metaphysical books.
And this, for me, I
don't think I had ever
heard the term enlightenment.
I'm at 24 at this time.
I was working as a file
clerk in a law firm
thinking I wanted
to be a lawyer,
and everyone at the
law firm was miserable.
This was my first job out
of college, and I'm like--
>>REGINA: It deals in misery.
>>STABILE: --I'm not
compromising my happiness
for a career.
I made that
commitment at that age
and mostly have stuck to it.
So my next job was at
this New Age gift shop,
and everyone there was
like, their mission in life
was to be more loving
and be more peaceful.
And I'm like, this I like.
I hadn't seen that and
heard people talk this way
and reference enlightenment.
And I'm like, I
can get into this.
And I did get into it.
I mean, I got into it hardcore.
But it opened me up to
the prospect of love
as a guiding force in my life
and that you don't necessarily
need more than that.
What happens if you
decide to choose love
as your guiding force?
What other choices does that
choice inform in your life?
How do you choose to
show up in your work,
in your relationships in
everything that you're doing?
So it really woke me up, and
in part because of the people
I was around, the
conversations I was having,
the books I was reading.
It felt like-- you ever have
that feeling where you show up
to a place that
you've never been
and it feels like coming home?
>>REGINA: Oh, absolutely.
My first stay in Sedona
when I chose to move there,
which happened through
some strange circumstances
like everybody
else there, I felt
like I just returned to my
tribe, my land, my being,
spirits, home.
All of it was there
for me the first day.
First day, we were invited
to someone's birthday party
in a grocery store line, and
everybody's flowing and dancing
to beautiful kind
of New Agey music.
And, oh yeah, I was in heaven.
I know exactly what
you're talking about.
>>STABILE: It's an
incredible feeling,
and that's what it felt like
walking into that store.
So it changed the
trajectory of my life.
I mean, it changed the
trajectory of my life
because of everything
I've just said,
and it changed it
because it's also
what got me involved in
a cult in the Bay Area.
>>REGINA: Yeah, let's talk
about the cult for a minute.
>>STABILE: OK.
What do you want to
know about the cult?
>>REGINA: I want to know
what kind of cult it was
and what they offered and how
they held sway and all of that.
Because most people haven't
actually been in a cult.
I mean, although you
could arguably say
certain religions are
a cult, of course.
>>STABILE: Of course.
Of course.
>>REGINA: But what
kind of cult was it?
>>STABILE: I mean, there
was a guru basically,
and it's a small-- it
doesn't have a name.
It's not like a recognized
cult. And I call it a cult
because part of
the, I would say,
the insidious nature
of cults, and this one
is loss of free will, that
everything the guru says
is right.
He is a puppet of God
by his own declaration.
He is enlightened without
ego by his own declaration.
So if we're in resistance
to what he's saying,
we're in resistance
to the Divine,
and we're in resistance
to what is good for us.
And that's a very intense
message to internalize.
And I was a smart
rational guy, and--
>>REGINA: But you had
just gotten this feeling
from your experiences
at the New Age
shop of this drive toward
love, toward enlightenment.
So you were open.
>>STABILE: Open.
And all of my friends at the
New Age shop were his disciples.
They were all part
of this community.
I was really open.
And I also, when I
reflect on it now
through an even clearer lens, I
see that to have a man 16 years
my senior giving me
attention and giving me
love, which I never got--
>>REGINA: Father.
>>STABILE: --from this
beautiful father figure.
And he has a lot of love.
There was so much love
in this community.
I was a part of it for 13 years
because it was immersed in love
and talking about unconditional
love and unconditional
friendship.
And there's a darker side.
There's an unwillingness
in my former teacher
to acknowledge his humanity
within the context of who
he is.
Yes, he's loving, and
also he's got a big ego.
And his ego was directing
a lot of the decisions,
and there was a lot
of cruel behavior,
manipulative behavior,
ugly behavior.
>>REGINA: Demanding
fealty and so forth?
>>STABILE: All of it.
And I would always make excuses
for it, and the excuse I made
was, I am not
enlightened I don't know
what enlightenment looks like.
>>REGINA: I mean, I detest
cults, gurus, et cetera,
the notion of it.
Not to say there aren't some
lovely gurus in the world.
I'm sure there are.
But to give your power
away is a whole other--
that's a place I've never been
able to go in my own being
because of exactly what
you're talking about.
You bought that
because you bought
into his story of being
a self-proclaimed guru.
>>STABILE: I believed
he was enlightened.
And I believed he
was enlightened,
and there was nothing
at that time in my life
that became more important to
me than becoming enlightened.
I was obsessed with it.
All I wanted to do was
be this fully realized
enlightened human being, and
I'm like, he's my ticket.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's how people are
taken advantage of.
>>STABILE: Absolutely,
absolutely.
>>REGINA: It's
exactly that desire.
And it's a clean pure desire.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
And one of the great gifts
of leaving that community
was also leaving my
obsession with enlightenment
because it created so
much pain in my life.
I was constantly judging
myself against the
what I imagined the enlightened
version of myself to be.
And the thing that I
discovered, Regina,
was that everything I
was choosing in my life
for enlightenment, which was
to be as loving as possible,
as forgiving as possible, as
compassionate as possible,
all of these things I was still
choosing in my life having
nothing to do with enlightenment
because I just recognize
that when you're loving and
forgiving and compassionate,
you're always serving yourself
in the world most beautifully.
So it doesn't have to be with
an end goal of enlightenment
in mind.
So I didn't change
any of my behaviors,
but I removed this thing to
aim for and to feel less than
because I wasn't.
And that was a huge gift.
>>REGINA: Congratulations,
you did the journey.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
Yeah, it was wild.
>>REGINA: It's a path of
real enlightenment, yourself,
I mean you.
>>STABILE: Yeah, absolutely.
And it's a lifetime journey.
I think there are
a handful of people
probably on the planet who are
fully realized and blissed out
and don't struggle with
the things that most of us
struggle with, with
ego and being human.
But that's 0.0001%.
The rest of us will be
working, I believe--
if you choose to consciously--
your lifetime at it,
and that's just the
nature of humanity.
And I've become more
and more OK with that.
>>REGINA: Well, you had some
other moments of humility
that were on the horizon.
>>STABILE: Yeah, sure.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about your film.
>>STABILE: I knew
that was coming when
you said moments of humility.
That was the obvious--
>>REGINA: What do you
call it, "The Oogieloves"?
>>STABILE: "The Oogieloves in
the Big Balloon Adventure."
>>REGINA: "The Oogieloves in
I mean, what was
amazing to me is
that it opened in so many
theaters to begin with.
>>STABILE: Over 2,000 theaters.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so--
>>STABILE: As an
independent film.
It wasn't--
>>REGINA: So first of all, how
did you even become a script--
>>STABILE: A writer?
>>REGINA: --writer and so forth?
Where did that come
in the journey?
>>STABILE: The
first script I wrote
was when I was with an
ex, and we were in a movie
that I don't remember
the title of.
There still aren't,
but at the time,
there weren't many
gay films out there.
This was an independent gay film
playing at the indie theater,
and we went and saw it.
And for me, it was awful.
Everything about it,
for me, was not--
I wasn't into the writing.
I wasn't into the acting.
I wasn't into any aspect of it.
And I looked at my partner
at the time, and I'm like,
I am certain I can write
a better movie than this.
And he's like, then do it.
And I wrote a script.
And in retrospect, I mean,
that script was awful too.
I mean--
>>REGINA: But wait a minute.
But how did you get the buy-in
from all these other people--
>>STABILE: Oh, no,
no, I mean that's what
got me into writing.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>STABILE: That was
my very first script.
>>REGINA: The first one.
So it was awful.
>>STABILE: Yeah, in
retrospect, but it got me--
>>REGINA: Excited.
>>STABILE: That was the
first screenplay I wrote,
and I'm like, oh, this
is kind of a fun thing.
And then time passes,
and a friend of mine,
who was the producer of
the film "The Oogieloves,"
asked me if I wanted to
take a stab at writing it.
And--
>>REGINA: Now, why?
Because they knew that you
had done some script writing--
>>STABILE: Oh, I'd
written children's books.
>>REGINA: --and
children's books.
>>STABILE: I'd written
children's things for him.
>>REGINA: I noticed that, yeah.
>>STABILE: He was involved in
a lot of different children's
projects, so he was
familiar with my writing.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
>>STABILE: Yeah, Yeah, so
that's why he selected me.
Yeah, so I wrote the script
for this film called--
>>REGINA: "Oogieloves in
the Big Balloon Adventure."
>>STABILE: "Big
Balloon Adventure,"
which was targeted
at 3- to 5-year-olds.
It was for preschoolers, which
the producer had a lot of--
he brought the Teletubbies
from the UK to the States.
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
So he had some clout.
He knew his way
around the industry.
>>STABILE: Yeah, he knew
his way around the industry
at that time.
And he had a huge success
managing the Teletubbies
obviously because that
was a huge project here.
So we put this film
together, and it still
holds the record for the
lowest grossing wide release
film in history.
It's the biggest flop of all
time, and I'm the writer.
And I can laugh about
it now, but I was not
laughing when it happened.
I mean, it was a roller
coaster experience
of actually writing something
that was turned into a film
was huge.
And then actually having that
film get released in theaters,
all of the stuff was beyond
kind of my wildest expectations.
>>REGINA: Oh yeah, 2,000
theaters, that's huge.
>>STABILE: It's huge.
And then having it crash.
And you know right away.
I mean, you know on the
Friday it's released.
I think it was
actually Wednesday
because it was a Labor Day.
We knew day one
that it was a bomb.
>>REGINA: I meant to
bring your book here
because I have it
underlined, some
of the reviews that came out.
Your heart had to have
been in your stomach.
>>STABILE: I wish I
could remember them.
Oh, it was awful.
They were so cruel.
>>REGINA: They were so awful.
>>STABILE: It was so cruel.
It was cloyingly unbearable.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: That was one
of the better ones.
Cloyingly unbearable.
>>STABILE: Akin to the
end of the world, I think,
was another one.
I mean, they ravaged the film.
It was awful.
And that was a really--
I mean, creatively
speaking, certainly--
a traumatic thing to go
through and humiliating.
And as a writer, you're
only one aspect obviously
of the whole experience.
>>REGINA: But wait a minute.
Your partner, the
producer in this,
didn't he see this coming?
I mean, were you guys blind
to how it might be received?
Or how did this happen?
>>STABILE: I don't think so
because there was a tour done.
We did a mommy blogger tour
before the film came out.
And the film, for me,
the production quality
looked more-- it
looked like Barney.
There were these giant
puppet characters
interacting with humans,
and it was very weird.
You know what I mean?
Like PBS, like Teletubbies type.
So for me, I think it
looked like something you
would see on PBS, on TV.
That he got it into theaters,
I was very surprised
and excited and astounded.
But we did this mommy blogger
tour leading up to the release.
And do you know what mommy--
I'm saying that like you might
know what that is, but it's--
>>REGINA: Not really.
I assume it's appealing
to the mothers.
>>STABILE: Yeah, there's
this whole world of bloggers
that are moms,
and so they're all
sharing all their
information and they're
recommending products.
So we went to maybe
eight or nine cities.
>>REGINA: They're
mommy influencers.
>>STABILE: Mommy
influencers, yeah,
before that term was around.
And so we went to
a bunch of cities,
and we screened it for
these mommy influencers.
And the coolest part
of the whole movie,
which was this
producer's idea and which
was the most
exciting aspect, was
he wanted to make a "Rocky
Horror" film for kids
with the element of the kids
interacting with the movie.
So there were all these songs.
It's a musical.
There were all these
songs and dance numbers,
and there's this queue of
these butterflies going
through the screen where
the kids are invited
to get out of their
seats and dance
and move along with
the characters.
>>REGINA: Which sounds
really delightful.
>>STABILE: Which hadn't
been done in movies.
And it was.
And so we're on this
mommy blogger tour,
and I'm seeing all these
kids getting up and having
so much fun.
And I'm like, maybe I'm
wrong about this movie.
Because I was kind of like, I
don't know that this is really
going to resonate.
But these kids are enjoying
it, and it's for kids.
And then it opened,
and it just bombed.
So I think we all had this
excitement like, oh, the kids
are going to be into it.
But in retrospect
with the writing--
>>REGINA: But kids
can't drive themselves
to the movie theater.
>>STABILE: No.
And it wasn't--
>>REGINA: You have to get
through the gatekeepers,
the parents.
>>STABILE: There are
a million things that
could have been
done differently,
and the main one,
I think, was really
to appeal to parents
as well, which is
what animated films have to do.
>>REGINA: Which at home
on your television works.
>>STABILE: You don't need
the parents at home--
>>REGINA: You don't
need the parents.
But to go to the movie theater.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And then
they're offering
their input, their feedback.
>>STABILE: And we
didn't have the parents.
I had a funny conversation
with a friend of mine
who gathered some
writers together
for this online
conference thing,
and he was
interviewing me for it.
And after we interviewed,
he called me later
because we were talking
about the "Oogieloves"
and laughing about it.
And he called me, and
he said he was talking
with his 22-year-old son.
And he said, when
my son found out,
he's like, you know the
writer of the "Oogieloves"?
Because a lot of stoners would--
>>REGINA: So it's like
a little cult hit.
>>STABILE: It's a little
cult thing for pot smokers--
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>STABILE: --because it's so
twisted and bizarre, yeah.
>>REGINA: Well, and
you wrote in the book--
this is how bad it
was-- you didn't even
rise to the level of winning
the 33rd Annual Raspberry
Award, which is for
the worst films.
>>STABILE: Right.
It was nominated.
>>REGINA: Yeah, but you
didn't even win that.
>>STABILE: I couldn't
even win that, yeah.
>>REGINA: You came in
second to "Twilight Sage--
Breaking Down Part Two."
>>STABILE: Oh, that
must be newer research.
I didn't even know that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah,
I was looking at it.
>>STABILE: I just
know we didn't win.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, I
did some research, yeah.
>>STABILE: We came
in second, though.
>>REGINA: But so tell
me what this did to you
kind of on an egoic level.
>>STABILE: As hard
experiences often are,
it was a really
beautiful experience.
One, because what it did
for me is it showed me
I've had a profound failure.
I was depressed for
maybe a couple of weeks,
and then I started
writing again.
It was like, OK, is this going
to keep you from writing?
This is awful.
I had a lot of
financial interest,
meaning I thought it was
going to be a ticket to--
>>REGINA: Change your life.
>>STABILE: Yeah, and it
did in different ways.
So there were a lot
of disappointments,
but it's also like, OK, what
are you going to do about it?
Are you going to let this
stop you from creating?
Are you going to
let this stop you
from putting your
energy into the things
that you want to put
your energy into?
No, of course not.
>>REGINA: And that was
really important, I think.
>>STABILE: It's huge.
>>REGINA: Huge for you
because a lot of people
don't get past that.
>>STABILE: No,
you can just stop.
A lot of people may have.
But the other thing I
realized, what I write about
in the chapter, is it's
like, how do you really
define success, and how do
you really define failure?
Writing a script that ultimately
is the biggest bomb of all time
means so little to
me compared to how
am I showing up as a
loving compassionate person
in the world.
How am I impacting people?
How am I affecting people?
How am I resonating
with other people?
That's what means the
most to me in my life.
That's what I'm giving my
energy over to the most,
and that's ultimately how
I define success in my life
is based on how forgiving I am,
how compassionate, how loving.
>>REGINA: Who you
are as a person.
>>STABILE: Who I am as a person.
And I say that, and when
"Big Love" came out,
all the same ego
stories came through.
So it is true what I'm
saying that I define success
by how loving and what
kind of person I am.
And then I write another
book, and it's like,
are people going to like it?
Are people going to buy it?
All those ego stories come
out because we are everything.
And what I'm learning
in my life is
I can hold space for everything.
I can hold space
for the ego story
without judging myself
for it because we're human
and we all have
that BS going on.
And I can hold space
for the part of me
that is so not about that, that
recognizes love and compassion
and kindness is what matters.
And keep showing up
in your creativity,
keep doing what you
feel called to do.
And as much as possible,
let go of the outcome
because we have no
control over the outcome.
>>REGINA: So often,
especially if you're in--
in general in the
world, everywhere now,
it doesn't matter what
you thought was stable.
It's not stable anymore.
And so you might as
well be yourself.
And I'm reflecting back on a
situation when I was young,
I was on top of the world.
I was working for NBC , flying
first class to New York,
and having a blast doing
weekend sports, making money.
And then because it was very
inconvenient and expensive
to fly me in from Lake
Tahoe where I lived--
because I like skiing--
they told me I had an ultimatum.
They said, you have to
move to New York City.
We can't keep doing this.
It takes a day to get you here
and to the stories and such.
And I said, well, but
I really like skiing.
I really like to
ski on my days off.
And basically, I got notice
from my attorney I was fired,
and so that was immediately.
So now I have no income, right?
And so I'm working at a little
jean shop in Tahoe City--
>>STABILE: That's humbling.
>>REGINA: --called
Finding Funky.
And there was this
moment, and I experienced
what you experienced in
that there was this moment--
I was fine doing it.
It was fine.
This man came in,
and he had a ponch.
And we did free alterations,
and I was on my knees
and pinning up his pants
to the right length.
And he looked down,
and this light went on.
He said, hold on a minute.
Aren't you that NBC
girl with Bryant Gumbel?
I said, well, that was
me then, this is me now.
>>STABILE: How wonderful.
>>REGINA: And I realized
I wasn't embarrassed,
and that was a huge
defining moment in my life
to realize I'm not that.
I'm me.
No matter what I'm
doing, I'm still me.
And it didn't destroy me,
and I didn't quit media.
I just went on to do
lots of other things.
But it was just a
comedown in that moment.
And he felt so
embarrassed for me.
And I've had other such
situations in later years
happen where people
were just like,
oh my God, if that happened
to her, it could happen to me.
Other people in the media.
No, that's not who we are.
That's just your calling card--
>>STABILE: It's
just what you're--
>>REGINA: Your job.
>>STABILE: --doing
in that moment.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STABILE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and so that
whole thing about shame.
And that really brings us to
the subject of shame, which
you talk about quite a bit.
And also, we're going
to get into the subject
of forgiveness,
including the person that
did this to your parents.
But first, let's go to shame.
Now, a lot of people
would feel shame
after having a
real bust like that
and carry the shame
around with them,
which is let's talk about the
notion and the nature of shame
and what it does
to the human being.
>>STABILE: It's so dark,
it's so insidious, shame.
I mean, for me, shame
is contrary to guilt.
I think people mix
those things up often.
And for me, if I'm feeling
guilty about something,
it's about an action
that I've taken.
I was a real jerk.
I did something, and
I'm having guilt.
And shame is more
insidious because it's
saying who you are.
It's not about what you've
done, it's that who you are
is flawed.
>>REGINA: Who you
are is flawed, yes.
>>STABILE: Is flawed.
You are not enough as you are.
There's nothing you can
do that will get you
to a place of being enough.
And that's a really
debilitating message
that we all have to
some degree or have had.
Hopefully, some of us
have transcended it,
but I still see shame
creeping in in different areas
of my life.
>>REGINA: It can be shame
around having someone fire you,
for example.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Like, what about me?
You can feel like I'm not
good and I'm not worthy.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Shame around body.
How many people, men and women--
>>STABILE: Everyone
has body shame.
>>REGINA: --have body shame.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: The vehicle
that they're showing up
in is insufficient and something
you hide from the world
because it's so shameful.
And you think, wait a minute,
I have been out to hot springs
where there are clothing
optional or no clothing allowed
basically.
You see every kind of
body under the sun.
>>STABILE: That's so beautiful.
>>REGINA: And within
a moment or two,
you don't really notice the
person's shape and size and all
of that.
But what lengths
people go through--
because you talk about
this in your book--
to hide their own bodies.
>>STABILE: Oh my God.
>>REGINA: You went
through body shaming.
>>STABILE: Losing
my hair at a young--
I lost my hair early.
And I knew it was coming--
>>REGINA: Thank God bald is
cool because you look great.
>>STABILE: Well, thank you.
But in college, it
was really traumatic.
I was never without
a baseball cap
on my head for the first
three years of college.
No one saw the top of my head
because I was going bald.
And the energy that went
into that, the energy,
it's insane when we
consider the energy
we put into hiding ourselves.
>>REGINA: Hiding ourselves.
>>STABILE: It's exhausting.
And what it does is
it naturally doesn't
allow us to show up with energy
for other things in our lives
that can actually be rewarding.
>>REGINA: We don't
realize that, though.
We don't know what this
insidious program running
in the background is doing.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
I mean, my sexuality
has been, by far,
my biggest shame in my life--
>>REGINA: Right, and I was
going to get to that too.
>>STABILE: --and coming
to terms with being gay.
I mean, that is a shame
that's really heavy.
And what I've come to learn
about shame, what I've
come to discover about
it, is the only way
to transcend it is to
announce it, is to speak it.
And if you can't
announce it to the world,
find someone you can confide in.
Because what happens
naturally when
we speak our shame to another
person, someone we can trust,
someone who is able to
receive it without judging us,
it automatically starts to lift.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STABILE: And we also
see that we're not alone.
I've done a lot of, for
the past nine years maybe,
been on social media a lot
and sharing a lot of myself
through writing.
And any time I share the
more vulnerable elements,
the elements I feel shame
about or traumas or fears
or whatever, they're always
the posts that get the most
response and engagement.
And the engagement
is almost always
of the variety of
"me too" and thank
you so much for sharing this.
I want you to know
you're not alone,
and thank you for letting
me know I'm not alone.
And that is one of the
most profound deepest gifts
that come when we have
the courage to share
our shame with the world.
It's like rolling out
a red carpet for people
to see you are not alone in
what you are experiencing.
And that's how we heal.
That's how we grow.
That's how we connect.
That's how we deepen our empathy
and compassion for one another.
I mean, look at the
#MeToo movement.
Look at what happened
when a handful of women
were willing to
stand in their shame
and finally announce
it to the world.
Walls came down
around the world.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
that's a big one
because that's happening
on subtle levels
all the time with women.
It always has historically.
You need to do
what you have to do
to get where you need to go to
keep a position of stability
or security in your life.
It happens in situations,
even marriages
that's happening all the time.
But that was so flagrant.
And because it's Hollywood and
has bigger, more glitzy story
around it, I'm
hoping that it helped
women start to understand where
we've all sold ourselves out.
>>STABILE: I think it has.
>>REGINA: It's not just
that you're a victim.
There is an element
and the shame
comes in having agreed
to certain things
in order to, say,
not lose their job.
That's very deeply
part of being feminine.
>>STABILE: Yeah, yeah,
it's the whole story.
>>REGINA: Yeah, the whole story.
>>STABILE: I mean, and
if you're willing to be
honest with yourself and really
make space for the whole story.
But for me, the thing
I really encourage
people to do if they're
able is start sharing it.
And we live at a time--
and if you're not
ready to share it,
start reading books
of people who have.
Because I guarantee whatever
shame you're experiencing--
not you, the universal you--
there are any number of
people who are dealing
with that exact same shame.
Our shame tells us we're alone.
Even as a gay kid knowing that
I'm not the only gay person
on the planet, my shame wanted
me to believe I was alone
in it, that there was something
about my sexuality in nature
that was singular and it was
darker and more sinful than
other people's.
That's the message of shame.
But if you're not able to
speak your shame and share it,
read it.
Type your shame into
Facebook, and you'll
see 50 pages that
are dedicated to it.
And this is what can
help us get to a place
where we feel ready because
we've seen enough people who
are dealing with the
same types of situations
we're dealing with.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
And also, I just was
flashing on something
when you were talking.
We have three or four
different channelers
that appear regularly on this
show throughout the years
because people love
them, and one of them
said, the greatest sin, if
you have a sin of humanity,
is to carry shame
for themselves.
That's the darkest thing
we can do is carry shame.
>>STABILE: Yeah, you
can't be in your truth
when you're in your shame.
It's not possible.
>>REGINA: And yet at the same
time, when we go to the movies
or we read books, the one
thing is our heart cracks open
when a person reveals
their true vulnerability.
That's when we start
feeling for each other.
>>STABILE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: That's when you really
want the person in the film
to succeed.
They've been through so much.
They've had this horrific
experience or whatever
they've been hiding.
And it should teach us
something for ourselves,
but we don't seem to
take that away from it.
We still hide.
>>STABILE: I think
it's shifting.
>>REGINA: Even though we know.
We can see that it breaks
our heart open when
someone else reveals something.
>>STABILE: Yeah, I do
believe it's shifting.
It's slow.
Evolution is so slow.
>>REGINA: Well, I
think social media
has done a good job of
that because it's so me,
me, for good or bad.
>>STABILE: Yes, for sure.
But there are a lot of writers,
speakers, healers, artists
who are more willing to
be in their vulnerability,
to show like, hey, this
is what I'm going through.
This is what-- and it's
helping other people,
I think, find the courage
to do the same thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I think so.
>>STABILE: That's
the gift of it.
>>REGINA: It is.
And let's talk about
the gift of forgiveness
and how that worked in your
life and how you ultimately
had to contend with the person
that murdered your parents.
>>STABILE: Yeah, I mean,
forgiveness is, for me,
one of the biggest gifts
that we can give ourselves,
and is for me a mandate of love.
Love is forgiveness.
So I don't see anything
as unforgivable.
It's not how I live my
life or look at life.
And that's not to
say that I don't
see forgiveness is the toughest
mandate of love for most of us.
But with the man who
killed my parents, what
I started to notice about
myself was that for years
I was living in rage and hatred.
As a teenager, I was never
thinking about forgiveness
after that.
It wasn't even heard
coming into my mind.
But in my 20s when I
got the job at the store
and I'm reading
more of these books
and I'm starting to feel
how love is operating
in my being, what
I started to notice
is that when I
would think of him,
I'd be overcome with hatred
and rage and vengeful thoughts
and violent thoughts,
wanting him dead.
You know what I mean?
Like thinking all these horrors,
which made perfect sense.
But then I started to
really pay attention
to how I was feeling when I
was having these thoughts.
How were those thoughts
impacting me emotionally,
physically?
Feeling tight in my chest,
feeling nervous in my stomach,
feeling like this when
we're angry and rageful.
>>REGINA: Poisoning your being.
>>STABILE: Poisoning
my being, absolutely.
And what I came to believe was
that I need to forgive him.
I need to figure out
a way to forgive him.
That's going to be my ticket to
freedom from this experience.
>>REGINA: Did you learn about
him, anything about him?
>>STABILE: Not specifics,
other than knowing--
because he was someone that knew
my-- he came into the store.
What I knew about him for
sure was that he was poor.
What I felt like I
could judge about him
was that he was angry.
He felt lost.
He felt confused.
Because nobody
would murder people
if they weren't feeling
rage and confusion
and all of these
different things.
And so what I thought was, how
could I relate to this man?
Well, I feel lost.
I feel angry.
I feel confused.
I feel all of
these things that I
imagine this other
man feels that led
him to do this horrible thing.
And even the violence,
which I was telling myself,
well, I could never
relate to killing people,
I'd imagine killing
him in my head
over and over and over again.
So even the violence I
could relate to in my being.
And suddenly when I
was connecting with him
from those places, he wasn't
just a murderer, right?
He's another human being.
He's another brother of mine on
this planet who is struggling.
And that's not to in any
way condone the choice
he ultimately made, but
it's to understand him
beyond that choice.
It's to seek to understand
him, to empathize
with his experience as a
human being on this planet.
And it changed
everything for me.
And what I started feeling
when I would think about him
was love in my heart.
And ultimately what I realized
was I have forgiven this man.
And the gift of
forgiveness, for me,
was that it untethered me
to that experience of him
in this toxic hateful way.
And it's not that I
don't feel the pain
of the loss of my parents
even now, 30-plus years later.
It's not that--
>>REGINA: Has he been in
prison this whole time?
>>STABILE: He's been in
prison this whole time.
And it's not that
the pain of that
is what I don't
experience still,
but I feel none of
the hatred toward him
and haven't for decades.
>>REGINA: Congratulations.
>>STABILE: None of it.
And that has been one of
the biggest gifts in my life
honestly to be shown that I have
the capacity for forgiveness
on that level and that
forgiveness affords
us that kind of freedom.
>>REGINA: Beautiful job.
Beautiful.
>>STABILE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: OK, now let's kind of
move into where we are today.
And really, that's just
admirable and beautiful.
>>STABILE: You get a star.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
So now we're in a time
where the world has changed.
The pandemic turned
the world upside down.
It's left people
frustrated, confused, angry.
There's a lot of rage going on
out there for a lot of reasons.
And so in your way of--
as you blog and so forth,
how are you addressing this
with people who follow your
work, this darkness that they
feel they're contending with?
And that's a huge percentage
of the population because
of mass confusion, loss of
income, a lot of things.
>>STABILE: Yeah.
For the last month and a half,
I have not been on social media.
The first for over two
months, probably 2 and 1/2
months every day when
the pandemic started,
I was doing live videos
on Instagram and Facebook
because I felt like I could
show up and create a space that
was peaceful,
create a space that
allowed people to express
their fears and their angers.
And it felt like a way to be
present with the communities
that I've built there.
When your producer first reached
out to me to be on the show,
it was probably two months ago,
I was in a really dark space.
And I said yes only
because I trusted
that in two months' time I
wouldn't be in the same space
because--
>>REGINA: Because
you're an optimist.
>>STABILE: --that's
how life works.
But I was in a dark
space because I
was feeling really overcome by
the capacity for human beings
to be really ugly and violent.
I'm a very sensitive person,
as you are and as many of us
are in the world.
And when I get
into darkness now,
it's thankfully not
because of who I am.
It's not that I don't
see the parts in me
that I want to work
on and want to grow,
but I really love who I am.
I really offer myself love
even when I'm judging myself.
I'm really good at that.
When I get into
darkness now, it's
because I look at a world
that is so violent and so
toxic and so unconscious.
And I see myself in
that too, the ways
I'm acting in that way.
And it overwhelms me at times.
And watching ourselves
go through this pandemic
and go through George Floyd
and everything around racism
and seeing the
beauty that's coming
from that and the awakening
that's coming from that and how
powerful and necessary
and important that is--
>>REGINA: Profound.
>>STABILE: --profound.
And also seeing
the ugliness that
is being exacerbated by it.
I don't know what
else to say other
than I have learned the most
by being with what is happening
with me in the most honest
way possible and looking
at my place within it.
What I know is that
if I focus on how
dark and violent this world
can be, that doesn't serve me.
If I focus on how dark
and violent I can be
and seek to heal that and
put energy into healing that
and put energy into showing
up with more love and more
compassion and being an
example of what I want to see
in the world, that serves me.
And that's what I believe
ultimately serves the world.
So what I needed to do was
not focus as much on the news.
And what I was doing was just
feeding myself more information
that ultimately--
>>REGINA: Oh, it's toxic.
>>STABILE: It's so toxic, right?
We ultimately only
have power over how
we're choosing to show up.
So what kind of world
do you want to create?
What kind of world
do you want to see?
And what are you
doing to create it?
There are going to be people
out there all the time
who are saying things
that are horrifying to you
and offensive to you and
unevolved and unconscious
to you.
OK, if you're going to choose
to respond to those things,
how are you choosing to respond?
Is it with empathy, or
are you dismissing them?
Are you belittling them?
Are you dehumanizing them?
I don't want to
dehumanize even those
who seek to dehumanize me.
That is not the life
I want to be living.
That is not my
contribution to this world.
And it is very easy to get
sucked into the toxic nature
of hatred.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>STABILE: Very, very easy.
It's almost--
>>REGINA: It takes over
because it actually
becomes almost a chemical
response in the body
and in the brain.
>>STABILE: Yeah, absolutely.
It's addictive.
>>REGINA: And it's
looking for satisfaction
and it's addictive.
>>STABILE: It's absolutely
addictive, yeah.
It's almost--
>>REGINA: Not good.
>>STABILE: --always harder
to make the choice of love.
But the choice of love
by empathy, compassion,
forgiveness, whatever, that's
all love in action for me.
That choice is always going to
benefit you and always benefit
others.
And not by ignoring
what's going on,
not by pretending
it doesn't happen,
injustice doesn't exist,
that's not my path of love.
By showing up and making noise
in the face of injustice,
but by not disconnecting
from your heart while
you're doing it.
Does that make sense?
>>REGINA: It does make sense.
And so that's your gift that
you offer to others, the work
you've done on yourself.
>>STABILE: I believe.
>>REGINA: Well, with
that, I want to thank you.
We're out of time.
It's been absolutely
delightful conversation.
>>STABILE: Thank you.
For me too.
>>REGINA: And so we're
going to have people
go take a look at your book.
How's that?
>>STABILE: OK, sure.
>>REGINA: Because
it's a fun ride.
>>STABILE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: It's like, oh my God,
I can't believe he said that.
That's so humiliating.
We didn't get into a lot
of that because that's
all in your book.
That's the flavor of
the book is just--
>>STABILE: Putting
it all out there.
>>REGINA: --showing yourself,
putting it all out there,
showing yourself for who you
are, warts and all, like I said
in the very beginning.
>>STABILE: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: It's been delightful.
Thank you, Scott.
>>STABILE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: You can follow Scott's
work on scottstabile.com--
S-T-A-B-I-L-E-- and pick
up a copy of "Big Love"
from major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]